I just won the speech evaluation contest
at my local Toast Masters Club and in
this video I am going to teach you
exactly how I did it I'm going to give
you information about what the judges
are looking for I'm going to teach you
how to write your notes in an effective
template Manner and then how you can
actually ditch those notes for the
speech evaluation contest so that you're
delivering a great evaluation without
looking down at notes at all now I know
what you might be thinking cool Wade you
won a club contest great but does that
really give you the authority to create
a YouTube video about how to win the
speech evaluation contest especially at
higher levels well here's the reality in
my Toastmasters career I've have
competed five times in speech evaluation
contest and I have won every single time
I have competed back in 2017 I competed
at the club level then the area level
then the district level then the
division level and I won all of those
contests first place every time and then
this year six years later I'm taking it
on again and I just won the club contest
and in all of those situations I have
deployed the same strategy so I want you
to watch this video very carefully
especially if you're thinking of taking
on a contest because throughout I'm
going to give little tidbits of
information which are essential and
which if you follow I promise you will
increase your chances at winning your
next speech evaluation contest so let's
start with what is a speech evaluation
contest how does it work because it's a
very unique contest within the
Toastmaster system a test speaker will
come up to the front of the room and
speak for 5 to 7 minutes and during that
time contest in the speech evaluation
contest can furiously write notes on a
single piece of paper which is what I
have here this is from today's contest
and you can write as many notes as you
can while the speaker is delivering his
or her presentation and then after that
presentation has concluded the
sergeant-at-arms will take out the
contestants when they're in person or
there will be a breakout room via zoom
and contestants will have an additional
five minutes to write any notes that
they need and then after that five
minute point the sergeant-at-arms will
take away your notes so you don't have
notes that you can look at and there
will be a predetermined order of who
gives their evaluations from there when
it's your turn to come up and present
for your speech evaluation contest you
will have between two and 3 minutes to
deliver your presentation and it is
incredibly important that you are aware
of the time and that you can see the
timing lights because any evaluation
that is less than 1 minute 30 seconds
will be disqualified and any evaluation
that is more than 3 minutes 30 seconds
will also be disqualified and it would
be such a shame to deliver a great
evaluation only to find out you didn't
even have a chance at winning because
you went over or under time so you might
be wondering well what are the judges
looking for when they're giving scores
to the various speech evaluators and I'm
going to show you the Toastmasters
official judges guide and the categories
that they're looking at as you can see
there are four categories and each has a
different waiting the first is
analytical quality is it clear is it
focused the second is recommendations
where they positive specific and helpful
the third is technique was it
sympathetic sensitive motivational and
finally summation was it concise was it
encouraging my first massive tip that is
incredibly important if you are going to
win a speech evaluation contest is don't
miss that fourth category it is the most
common mistake I have seen in these
speech evaluation contests is that
people completely forget to give a
conclusion and to be quite Frank it is
the easiest part of delivering a speech
evaluation
you simply have to remember to do it
later in this video I'm going to show
you exactly how you can incorporate a
conclusion winning a speech evaluation
contest starts as soon as you receive
your blank piece of paper these are the
notes I wrote on today but this paper
was blank when I received it as soon as
you receed that piece of paper that is
when the contest starts for you most
people don't approach it that way they
have their piece of paper and they
listen to the the speaker and they don't
think to write notes in my experience
you have to be constantly writing notes
as you are listening to the speaker
because it is hard you are in a contest
you're not going to remember every
single thing that the speaker talks
about so it's important that you be
writing down notes continuously
throughout the speech which are going to
help you formulate your official
evaluation later on on the screen you're
going to see a template of how I
approach taking my notes which has led
me to have success in this contest and
it's really broken down into four
categories you'll see the word intro up
at the top then a plus sign below that a
minus sign and at the bottom conclusion
you'll also notice that I've included
the word speaker name up at the top of
the sheet and as soon as you learn the
name of the test speaker write his or
her name name down so that you don't
forget it write it in big letters I want
you to continuously think about that
name because as you're giving your
evaluation you're going to say the
speaker's name and you don't want to
forget what that person's name is so
let's start with the intro one of the
most important parts of a great
evaluation and I want you to think about
these evaluations for the contests as
almost a speech within themselves many
contestants will start off with the
Toast Masters formalities thank you
madam contest chair fellow Toast Masters
and especially Bob or whatever the test
speaker's name was and that's good you
want to include the formalities but if
you can you want to have an introduction
first which references something that
was said or a general theme about the
speech this is going to act as your hook
to get the audience's attention then you
can transition into the formalities
thank you Madame contest chair fellow
Toast Masters and then from there you
can jump into the next section which is
that plus sign which is the things that
the speaker did very well considering
that the intro is one of the most
important parts of a speech evaluation
contest I want you to pay incredibly
close attention especially when the test
speaker is starting to find a direct
quote or something they say that is
powerful funny memorable and I want you
to write that in your intro section and
that is how you can start your
evaluation by literally repeating some
of the words that the speaker said as an
example in the speech evaluation contest
that I won today the test speaker gave a
very emotional and vulnerable speech and
she started that speech by saying for 31
years I was very sad she had a longer
intro but then later in the speech she
talked about a book that had helped her
gain A New Perspective in life let's
call this test speaker Suzie this was
how I started my introduction of the
evaluation I did today for 31 years I
was very
sad but then I found this book The Four
Agreements and since then I've had a
different perspective on life thank you
Madame contest chair fellow Toast
Masters and especially Suzie and from
there I went into the speech so it was
taking a specific thing a specific line
that was referenced that was powerful
and that's how I started my evaluation
if you're able to do this I guarantee
you're going to separate yourself from
most of the other competitors especially
at the club level and as you get further
in the contest more and more people will
be deploying this type of creativity
so you'll need to have an intro like
this in order to compete with the others
so in the middle of the piece of paper
you have a plus sign and a minus sign
the plus represents the things the
speaker did very well and I want you to
try to find three things that the
speaker did very well the minus
represents areas they could have
improved or gifts as we call it in Toast
Masters and I want you to find two
things that they could improve upon
Y3 and Y 2 this magic number of five in
my experience five things to touch on is
about the most things that you can talk
about within the allotted time
comfortably within that 3 minutes and
you need to be moving at a quick Pace it
also allows you to provide specific
examples for those things the other
reason we're giving three positives and
two gifts is that as I mentioned on the
judge's sheet so many of the categories
are are you being sympathetic are you
being helpful are you being encouraging
and the more positive things we can talk
about what the speaker did the more it
fits into that judge's criteria you may
have noticed something else on my notes
template for the speech evaluation
contest and that is some words and
categories on the right hand side this
is something I always do I write down a
number of things things like body
language vocal variety speech structure
Oz and ums or strategic pauses humor and
a few other words we know that these are
the essentials to what makes a good
speech and sometimes when we're
evaluating somebody in the moment we may
forget to keep an eye out for certain
things but if we have those words to the
side we can instantly connect what
they're doing well and what they need to
improve upon so in the past I've
actually taken a word like body language
and just drawn an arrow into the plus
category or put a little plus beside it
as a quick reminder this speaker is
using really great body language or if
they are saying um and a a lot these are
filler words that would be better
replaced by pauses I could put a little
negative sign beside it and that will
jog my memory to know that maybe
strategic pauses is one of the ways the
speaker could improve their next speech
so while part of your task is
identifying these three things the
speaker did well and two things that
they could improve upon your biggest
challenge is to find specific examples
and write those down word for word so
that you remember to talk about them
when you're delivering your presentation
again as an example in the club contest
that I competed in in today the test
speaker was talking about her mother and
it was a powerful line and when she did
she brought her hands close to her chest
in my evaluation as I was talking about
the fact that Susie had used great body
language I brought my hands to my heart
and I repeated that line that she had
spoken about her mother to remind
everyone in the room of that body
language and in another part part of the
speech she had talked about being like
rubber and not glue and allowing things
to deflect off of you and she made this
motion of coming in and pushing out and
so as I gave that example I did the same
hand motion coming in pushing out and it
allowed for everyone to be able to
remember that exact moment in the speech
the more specific examples you're able
to include in your evaluation the more
you will stand out from the other
contestants and and this isn't easy it's
almost as challenging as finding that
intro information but you're going to be
constantly on the lookout and that's why
I say it's so important as the speaker
is speaking you want to be looking up
and observing him or her but you
constantly want to be writing notes down
so that you can give these relevant
examples just like the positives the
three positive things where you give
examples you're going to deploy the same
thing for the gifts and when you're
presenting you're going to talk about
all the positive things and then you're
going to transition into so how could
suie make the speech even better in the
future I think there's a couple of
opportunities and then you talk about
the two gifts in a positive constructive
way I mentioned before the conclusion is
one of the most important parts that is
most commonly missed yet is really the
easiest thing because you're just
repeating all all of the things you said
but you need to ensure your evaluation
ends with this how I like to structure
conclusions is by saying to conclude if
Suzie continues to use a great body
language while keeping a solid speech
structure and eliminating those filler
words like she did so well with
strategic pauses and she also includes
the element of eye contact and a
stronger conclusion her future speeches
are going to be incredible all you have
to do for the conclusion is repeat these
things in that formula and the judges
will give you full marks or high marks
for doing that but so many people forget
to do this and that is 15 points on the
scoreboard that they are leaving behind
because if they don't do it that is a
big zero that goes beside that category
so you're furiously writing notes while
the speaker is speaking and then he or
she f finishes the sergeant-at-arms
takes you outside and you have 5 minutes
with your notes or if you're on Zoom
you're put in a breakout room you need
to focus I have seen other contestants
chat to each other in my mind this is a
massive mistake you need to find a quiet
spot with your notes and finish filling
in all the categories for me often it's
tough to write read my writing it's like
chicken scratch so I'm trying to clearly
write out what what is that intro what
is that specific intro that I'm going to
say what are a couple of examples for
each of the categories I don't worry too
much about conclusion because if I've
memorized everything else the conclusion
is going to come pretty naturally but I
do write out just that reminder to
include the conclusion at the end once
that 5 minutes is done you are going to
either be called out right away if
you're contestant number one or you're
going to have some time but that time is
going to be without your notes and I
want to dispel a rumor because many
people think that if you go first or you
go third or you go last that there's a
massive advantage or disadvantage and I
will say each position has its own pros
and cons so if you're the first
contestant to go sure you don't have as
much time to think about what you're
going to say however your notes are the
most fresh in your head you've just
finished writing them and then you're
jumping right in front of the crowd
whereas the people who have to wait
longer they're stuck with their thoughts
and they may not remember exactly what
they've written down however if you do
go later whether it's last or third or
fifth in the contest I also see that as
being an opportunity because you have
time without your notes to find a quiet
spot and visualize yourself and talk
quietly to yourself as you mou the words
of what you're going to say in that
evaluation and you can mentally practice
and try to remember what you had written
down and the longer you have to do this
the more comfortable you may be without
ever looking at your notes the further
you go with these speech evaluation
contests The more important it is to
deliver an evaluation without
referencing your notes therefore this
memory mization piece is incredibly
important and while I understand things
happen we freeze when we're in a contest
and you may want some comfort of the
notes one suggestion is to adjust the
podium to the side so that your notes
are there but you have the goal of not
referencing them of making eye contact
with the audience and then if you forget
what you're going to say you can quickly
look to the side reference your notes
and then turn back to everyone but those
people who give evaluations by holding
or looking at their notes the whole time
you may have success at the club level
but I would guess at the area and the
higher levels you're going to run into
competitors who are not using notes and
therefore come across as better
evaluators so when it's your turn to
deliver your speech evaluation the
sergeant-at-arms will bring you into the
room you will shake the hand of the
contest chair he or she will introduce
you they may ask you if you can see the
timing lights and then that's your
chance you can set your notes down maybe
move the podium to the side and then you
begin your evaluation and in order to
succeed with this evaluation you're
going to do all of the things we've
already talked about in this video
you're going to start with that intro or
that hook to draw in the audience a line
or two a specific example or a specific
theme from the speech that draws in the
audience attention then you have your
formalities thank you Mr contest chair
fellow Toast Masters welcomed guest and
especially and you say the speaker's
name you can if you feel comfortable
include other dignitaries some people do
this one way to address it if you know
there's many dignitaries in the room you
can say thank you madam contest chair
honored dignitaries fellow Toast Masters
welcome guests and especially and always
say the speakers name especially an
important piece about winning a speech
evaluation contest is to stay in third
person a common mistake is to transition
from saying the speaker's name Susie and
then saying you and looking at Susie and
saying you did this really well you
don't want to do that you always want to
reference Suzie talking in third person
so that everyone in the room gets the
full benefit of the evaluation and it
doesn't feel like it's just being
directed to suszie so you've done the
intro and then the formalities and then
you transition into that first positive
and bonus points if you can tie the
intro into what the first positive is
because it will make it flow that much
more smoothly for positives you may
address things like speech structure you
may talk about humor if it was injected
in strategic ways you may talk about
strategic pauses elimination of ums and
Oz you may talk about vocal variety you
may talk about body language you may
talk about eye contact there are many
many things you can bring up and as I
mentioned earlier on your notes it helps
to have some of these categories on the
side so that you remember them while
you're writing notes for your evaluation
so one at a time you give these
positives with specific examples if you
can then you say the words how does
Suzie make this speech even better in
the future and you transition into those
two gifts those two areas of improvement
and still try to deliver them in a
positive way after you've done that you
wrap up in conclusion if suie continues
to do this this and this and also begins
to implement this and this the two gifts
she is going to do incredible in the
future boom you've added the conclusion
15 points you have a creative Hook off
the start you've given great positive
advice throughout that is a winning
speech evaluation my friends I hope this
deep dive into the speech evaluation
contest with Toast Masters and how you
can win at even the highest levels was
helpful for you please let me know my
YouTube channel is all about not only
Toast Masters but how to become a more
impactful Communicator in general and
also I have worked with others who have
wanted to take on the speech contest
I've worked in a Consulting form I've
also helped others in their Toast
Masters journey through things like
Icebreaker speeches so if you want to
work with me and see what that premium
service looks like please let me know my
email is down in the notes otherwise
best of luck on your speech evaluation
contest you're going to do great